3	Introduction
In recent years technology has improved within machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) and compute power and storage has become increasingly cheaper. This has created a widespread use of ML and AI applications. This is very beneficial as it can help companies and organizations within many areas, such as: save employee working hours by automation manual task, forecast demand of products to ensure the right supply, recommend the best movies or products for marketing. Even though the technology is available, many companies and organizations do not utilize ML or AI fully or even at all. The reason is that ML and AI applications can be very time consuming to create, and it can require specialized employees, making cost of development be very high. A successful deployment of a new application also often requires a redesign of the business processes, training of existing employees in understanding and using the new application.
Because of the above ML and AI applications have often only been used in the biggest companies and organizations that can afford to hire specialized employees. This hinders progress and it is therefore a noble goal to enable everybody to use ML and AI applications. This challenge can be sought solved by using automated machine learning (automl). There is different variations of automl, but all tries to automate many or all of the steps involved in ML or AI. If automl is good enough, and user friendly enough, then almost everybody can be their own data scientist and create applications to use within their own domain area.
The technology of automl is still quite new, as it was first tried in ? . There have been many developments in the technology and there is now several automl possibilities both open source and proprietary. Several studies have compared the different automl options, seeing significant differences in prediction power and needed compute resources, depending on the dataset, type of problem (price prediction, anomaly detection, classification, time series prediction, etc.). There is not many studies on how to implement automl in practice into organizations and what is required to fully utilize the business potential of the technology. This paper aims to contribute to the literature of applied automl. This is done by conducting a case study on a small company with no previous experience with ML and AI to fully test the requirements of of applying automl.
The company is called Scandinavian Medical Solutions (SMS) and is a independent Danishbased dealer of high-quality pre-owned medical imaging equipment and innovative healthcare solutions. They help hospitals, medical clinics and distributors worldwide in making the right decisions when purchasing or selling pre-owned medical imaging equipment. SMS operates in a very complicated market, where every product is unique because it is pre-owned and can not be compared directly to a new product in terms of price. Procurement of products is complicated as it is often performed on auction platforms both with the private and public sector. SMS has the challenge of how to price the products being offered, which can depend on current demand for that system, the usage of the system, software specifications, seasonality, etc. There is also a significant time delay from winning a auction to the time it is available for SMS to use. SMS is therefore looking for a way to predict highest bid price, uncertainty regarding pricing, and several other metrics. With automl development costs can be reduced significantly compared to manually developing a ML application. This leads to the following problem statement:
How can automl be applied in practice in the auction market for used hospital equipment to do predictions, as an assistance for traders. 
4	Method
This section first defines the relevant terms from the problem statement. Secondly it defines the scope and limitations of the project. Third it reviews the different methods used for knowledge collection. Fourth it explains the structure of the project.
4.1	Definitions
How can automl be applied in practice in a auction market for pre-owned hospital equipment to do predictions as an assistance for traders.
Firstly, this paper uses the following definition of automl:
AutoML is defined as a combination of automation and ML. In a word, AutoML can be understood to involve the automated construction of an ML pipeline on the limited computational budget He et al. (2019).
In essence automl should not in theory outperform manual work with ML if all options are tested, but it can do it faster and easier and therefore enable non ml experts to use it. If a problem is very complicated with millions of rows, and thousands of variables, automl should also give an even better advantage. The reason is that exploring all models, hyperparameters and perform feature engineering manually would require a huge amount of time. Automl seems like a reasonable suggestion to explore as the market for pre-owned medical imaging equipment is quite complex, and the data is quite unstructured.
Secondly the predictions that will be performed is what will benefit the traders most as an assistance for their work. The reason the predictions is stated as an assistance for traders is that the predictions will never be accurate enough to automate the expertise of the traders, but they can still give good indications and fast estimates. The reason why the estimates will not be precise enough and the complexity of data will be explained more later in the relevant sections. In addition value is also gained for traders to explain the results, f. ex. by global and local feature importance, as this increases their understanding and helps them make better future decisions.
Thirdly from hereon to simplify the medical imaging equipment market, will just be called the market, and it will be specified if it is the pre-owned or the new market.
Fourthly auctions is in this project following the definition by (Krishna, 2009) that defines them as:
"an auction will be understood to include the process of procurement via competitive bidding."
It might not be a "true/pure" auction market, but to a high extend...?
4.2	Scope and limitations
The scope of this project is to collect data, clean it and test the performance of automl and compare it with benchmark models to validate the performance of automl. This project is to a high degree limited by time, data availability and data quality. SMS is a small company with only 3 full time employees and 3 part timers, and several consultants for task such as accounting, finance, marketing, etc. SMS is not a data or IT mature company meaning, the employees have low understanding of IT and data, data is in general messy and not ready for analysis and the amount of data available is small. This also implies that to perform any predictions, data must be extracted, cleaned and transformed. As this is requires significant time, this gives less time for the remaining tasks, but here the benefit of using automl is noteworthy, as this requires less time than creating manual ML models. This project only analyzes the purchase of goods performed on auction platforms. The reason for this is to get data that have similar price mechanics, and this is an area where SMS have the most data with the highest quality.
The scope of this project is not to explain machine learning workflows and models in depth, and will therefore be limited to it’s minimum. The focus is understand the data, the price mechanics in the auction market and to make a good performing automl models to do predictions.
4.3	Methods for knowledge collection
Interviews, surveys, litterature.
4.4	Structure
The subsequent section 5, explains the market that SMS operates in. Section 6 explains what will be predicted and how assistance for traders will be performed in practice. Section 7 will explain the available data, what data was extracted, cleaned and transformed to make it ready for analysis. Section 8 explains how automl works and how it will be performed, and benchmarked with a few standard models from ml and econometrics. Section 9 will explain the results from the models and evaluate model performances. Section 10 will conclude on the project and discuss the findings.
5	Market and operations
It’s important to understand the market and operations to select the right data for the automl, and also when using the application to assist traders, in terms of what info they need to make decisions. This section will first explain the market as a whole, the products in the market, how the purchase and sales side works, how the auctions are conducted and how SMS operates in this complex market environment.
5.1	Market for pre-owned medical imaging equipment
To understand the pre-owned market, it’s also important to understand the market for new equipment as well. This section reference several market studies conducted by: (marketsandmarkets, n.d.), (mordorintelligence, n.d.) and (fortunebusinessinsights, n.d.).
The global market for new equipment was 33,69 billion dollars in 2019, and is projected to reach 43,33 billion USD by 2027. This is both due to the rise in certain types of diseases and rising investments in healthcare in developing nations. The pre-owned market was 12.1 billion USD in 2020 and is projected to reach USD 21.2 billion by 2025. This means the pre-owned market haves a almost double the growth rated measured in CAGR (Compound annual growth rate), and is rising to be around 50% of the size of the new equipment market in 2025, from around 30% in 2019. The reason for the growth in the pre-owned market is a big increase in small and medium sized clinics. These hospitals buy pre-owned equipment because they have low capacity requirements, and a pre-owned system is therefore a better investment. The trend with buying pre-owned equipment is especially significant in developing nations, where capital to invest in new systems is limited. The pre-owned market consist of 2 sub markets which is selling as is, and refurbishment. There is an increasing trend for refurbishment, where either the OEM or another company buys back pre-owned equipment, refurbish it and then sell it again. Refurbishment can be upgrading software, replacing parts, etc, which prolongs the lifetime of the system and gives it new capabilities.
As the market is quite complicated the market is analyzed with the distinction between the purchase market and the seller market, from the point of view from SMS. The purchase market is where SMS buys products typically from hospitals, that wants a new product. The seller market is where SMS sells pre-owned products to customers, that cannot afford a new system or it is not profitable for them to do so. These markets vary in a lot of factors, because of different customer segments, contract types, laws, import and export rules, etc. First is a short introduction into the products that are traded.
5.1.1	Products
This section goes more in depth about the actual products, that is traded. The main brands within the industry is GE (General Electric), Siemens, Canon, Phillips which also is the main brands that SMS trade. Within this market for medical image equipment there is several different modalities, which is different product categories. Each modality represents the different technologies used in the product. Examples are MRI, ultrasound, medical radiation, CT, etc. (Medscience, n.d.).
Fig. 1: MRI and CT modalities
 
Source: https://www.scandinavian-medical.com/pages/equipment.
SMS trades all image modalities, but have specialized in CT and MRI that in total represents around 80% of the number of products traded by SMS. The reason that SMS primarily trades these modalities is that CT and MRI is the most commonly used modality in the hospitals and that gives a bigger customer group. In addition CT and MRI is very expensive compared to most other modalities which gives a bigger revenue and profit. A brand new CT scanner cost around 600.000 EUR for a standard model, and a brand new MRI scanner cost around ?-? for a standard model. As pre-owned they cost significantly lower, where a CT is around 0-?, and a MRI is around 0-?. In addition there is many barriers to entry in this market for trading CT and MRI, that decreases the number of competitors and makes it easier to have higher margins and increased profits. These barriers are specialized employees with specialist information, special contacts, high capital requirements, special requirements in terms of storage, specialized transport, etc. CT is cheaper than MRI, but there is more CT’s and they are easier to trade than MRI (Poulsen, 2021a).
5.1.2	Purchase market
This section will go in depth with the purchase side of the pre-owned market. This is quite complicated and therefore the below overview have been created, which will be explained more in-depth. The below sections on the purchase side is based on a interview with Poulsen (2021b) who is the purchasing manager. The view is seen from the view of SMS who mainly purchase goods in EU, but sell worldwide. 
Fig. 2: Market overview for pre-owned medical equipment
 
Source: Created based on interview with Poulsen (2021b)
The market consist of 4 different types of market players, each placed in their own ring. In ring nr. 1 which is the innermost ring, are the rightful owners of the product. In this ring there is 3 different sub types of players. There is the public hospitals, the private hospitals and the leasing companies. They all have in common that they own the system, that is being used in the hospital. Leasing companies buy products and lease them to hospitals if they don’t want to invest a high amount of capital up front. They all want to buy a good quality product, as cheap as possible and be able to sell the system later at a decent price if they want to upgrade to a new product. There is many thousands of hospitals and leasing companies. Some of these purchase on behalf of themselves as a single hospital whereas others purchase on the behalf of a region of hospitals or chain of private hospitals to increase bargain power.
In ring nr. 2 the local OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturer) are placed. They produce new equipment, and sell it through local offices often placed in each country or region. When hospital purchase managers needs to procure more products, they reach out to the local OEM. Often the local OEM is also reaching out to hear about any demands for new products. When the purchase manager of a hospital needs to procure new products, depending on the price?? it needs to go through a public tender, when it is within the EU. There is some strict rules of how this tender is evaluated. Everybody can bid on the tenders, but it is mainly the local OEM who does that if a new system is required, but there can be more bidders if it is a pre-owned system???. When a bid is placed, it is typically a combination of the following. 1. Repurchase price on the existing system placed in the hospital, 2. A price on a new offered system, 3. a service contract price for maintenance and software upgrades in the following x number of years, and 4. conditions in relation to dismantling, extraction, etc. (check up). In addition to this some local OEM’s have their own leasing company and financing company, which can also be a part of the deal. The local OEM is typically only interested in owning the old existing product if it the same brand as the OEM, as they then can refurbish it. If this is not the case, they want to sell it as they do not have the expertise or network to sell it. They also have very little knowledge about the true value of the old product. Therefore they often sell it through their mothercompany’s trade platform, but sometimes they sell it directly to a broker. The local OEM does not aim to earn very much on the sale of the new product or the repurchase of the old product. The primary way the local OEM earns money is by selling service contracts as a part of the deal, where they can earn millions of DKK pr. new product over timespan of 5-15 years. Because of this they are okay with loosing money on the other parts of the deal, just to win the contract. Winning increases the install base of products, that they have under service contracts. There is only 4 major local OEM’s in EU that is: GE, Siemens, Canon and Phillips. This means each local OEM have a high degree of market power.
In ring nr. 3 the trade platforms are placed. The trade platform and the local OEM is owned by the same mother company, but are 2 different entities and teams. There is only 4 tradeplatforms in EU, representing the following companies that are also OEM’s: GE, Siemens, Canon and Phillips. Each local OEM use only their own trade platform or a local broker, but are incentivized by the mother company to use the trade platform. There is between 20-35 brokers white listed on each trade platform. Only brokers that are white listed can make bids on the platforms, and there is a screening process to be accepted on the platform. The aim is that all brokers should have a certain level of financial stability and quality in terms of handling purchases on the platform(check up???). Each trade platform have their own rules, which must be followed or a broker can get banned from the platform. The aim of the trade platform is not always to earn money in facilitating the exchange, but instead to funnel revenue to the local OEM and the mother company. It is free to be on the platform, but the trade platform can take a hidden fee of the sales price, that is payed by the local OEM. The trade platform also controls the refurbish of the OEM, which is the area where they can earn money.
In ring nr. 4 the brokers are placed, along with SMS. The role of the broker is to simply buy products cheap and sell them at higher prices, but there is different sub types of brokers. There is the stock keeping brokers that purchase, dismantle, ship, inspect and store the products before selling. The stock keeping broker requires a high level of expertise, freight contracts, specialized technicians and a high level of capital to buy and store systems. SMS is a stock keeping broker. There is the ISO brokers that do the same as above, but they specialize in certain brands that they then refurbish by doing repairs, software upgrades, etc. before selling, and they also offer service contracts. The ISO brokers are therefore in direct competition with the local OEM’s. The above 2 broker types add a lot of value and handle many parts of the transaction process. In the opposite end is the options traders. They are small companies that only have procurement and sales, but do not keep stock and they have lower technical skills. The options traders buy systems on the auction platforms, and try and sell them before the availability date, where they need to be dismantled. If they can sell before availability date, they can make pure arbitrage as they have yet not payed for the system, as this often happens around availability. The option traders have low margin, fast trading and high risk, which mean they some times are not able to meet their obligations and are declared bankrupt.
The procurement strategy of SMS is called close the loop, and is about being in contact with players in all of the rings. This is to gain the most information, security and best price for the same system. Closer to the inner ring is the best, because in the outer rings more companies needs to make money, and that increases the price. F. ex. the same system can be bought directly from the rightful owners, before it reaches the trade platform, which is often to a better price and with more available information.
After purchase or meanwhile negotiating purchase, the sales department consisting of Jens Krohn tries to build a pipeline of possible customers that would be interested in buying the product. The sales market will be explained more in depth in the following section.
5.1.3	Sales market
This section on the sales market is build primarily on the interview of (Krohn, 2021). The sales market is important to understand as the auction prices are influenced by the current demand in the sales market. It’s the special institutions and market structures that creates the high spread and volatility in prices over time on the products.
SMS is a independent wholesaler broker. This means that SMS currently do not sell products directly to the end customers which is the rightful owners, as explained in the section on the purchase market. The reason for this is several legal and technical requirements. F. ex. to import to USA, it’s required to have a special FDA import certificate. Other countries also have many special requirements in terms of documentation, fees, etc. Some countries have problems with corruption and bribery making it even more challenging. In addition to this there is many technical requirements to handle the products, as also described in the purchase market section. Because of the many barriers to handle and import the products, the customers that SMS sells to are all companies who specialize in handling and importing these products.
The customers that SMS sells products to can be divided into 4 types. The RSO (Independent service organizations), OEM’s, salvagers and hospitals with a technical department. RSO buys systems on the wholesale market, transport them to the end user, install them and sells service contracts. RSO is the main customer on the sales side. RSO are a competitor to the OEM’s as they offer similar service as the OEM’s themselves. SMS can sell to OEM’s who want preowned systems for their refurbishment program. There are special hospitals with a technical department who can handle purchase, transport and import of the products, but these are uncommon. The last type is the salvagers who buy products and salvage them for parts, that they then inspect and maybe refurbish before reselling. This salvage process is very complicated and require special technicians and laboratory level equipment.
SMS haves customers all over the world. The high end and very expensive equipment is typically sold to USA or EU. The mid range equipment is typically sold to USA, Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, Middle east, Africa and South America. The low range equipment is typically sold to the Middle East.
The mid range is the most common equipment and something SMS know it can both buy and sell. These products typically have low storage time, because they sell fast. In the interview with Krohn (2021) he stated that the exact same equipment can be bought up to 60% higher than fair value, because of several reasons. Sometime they have a customer ready who wants such a system and they are willing to pay above fair market price, so SMS can still earn money on it. Sometimes SMS is also willing to strategically buy products over fair market price to stay in the market to satisfy customers demands, as that generate future request from customers. Even for the most common mid range equipment, there can be very fluctuating supply and demand effecting prices. Buying and selling mid range equipment is the most common trade that SMS does, but in addition they also have 2 other sales strategies. The second strategy is when the procurement team sees a good buying opportunity, but there is no current demand for that system. Then SMS compares the product with similar products of both the same and other brands in terms of quality and price. If it seems like a good opportunity SMS buys it, and then start to market it and try and sell it. This strategy can be very profitable but also comes at the risk of not selling the product, and with high storage cost it can become expensive. The third strategy is called passed through trades. Here a OEM request x amount of products of a certain model and are willing to give a fixed price for that. Then SMS can buy systems under that price, sell it to the OEM and then the OEM handles everything after the sales in terms of dismantling, etc. The OEM then refurbish these products before resale. These trades have low risk and low margin, but are secure revenue and profit.
Each country and geographical region has it own challenges in terms of transport, legal requirements, culture and business network. Common for all areas is that trading with pre-owned products globally requires a high level of trust. The reason is that pre-owned products is typically sold with the incoterms ex. works and ex warehouse. This implies that the risk transfer of the products, happens when SMS hand over the product, typically at our warehouse or at a specified airport or harbor depending on the country. Because SMS is then not responsible for the installation and service, they cannot offer a guarantee (aitworldwide, n.d.). Buying a CT scanner for 500.000 EUR with no guarantee is very high risk and it therefore builds on trust and a good reputation. If you do not have a good reputation then the customer often sends a special technician that controls everything from inspection, dismantling, extraction and transport. This comes at a very high cost, because of high technician salaries and because dismantling and extraction can take from a few days to weeks. SMS have a very good reputation so many customers trust SMS, and do not send a technician to control everything.
SMS customer portfolio consist of both big and small customers. Typically the big customers stands for most of the revenue, but it fluctuates over time. Most customers are repeat customers that come again and again, so it makes sense to create loyalty.
When SMS have a trade opportunity for purchase, they both estimate the buying price, the selling price and additional cost such as transport, packing and shipping. They then do sensitivity analysis by adjusting the different estimates to see how it impacts profits. If the estimated profits seems fair compared to time consumption and risk, they make a bid. They base the estimates on historical prices, the current market situation, and what customers are currently saying they are interested in buying. The sales department constantly takes to customers and ask what they need, to create up to date estimates, that can be used when bidding in the procurement department. Important to note is that 99% of the time, SMS do not have a binding selling contract at the time they buy a system, which means there is always a risk. The reason for this is that customers are not willing to by a system they are unsure SMS actually owns yet, and they are not certain of the exact specifications. This also means there is a trade off between having systems in stock that are easier to sell, and having systems in the pipeline that are in the process of being bought or are bought but not inspected and/or dismantled yet, that are harder to sell.
An important aspect of understanding the price mechanics in the sales market, is to understand the incentives of the end users, also called rightful owners. The public hospitals are governed under policies and laws, and potentially with certain incentives to reach certain KPI’s (Key Performance Indicators) or otherwise they will get hit by budget cuts. In many countries in Western Europe there is policies to enforce how old a scanner can be, and then it needs to be replaced, even if they are satisfied with the current incentive. The reason is politically motivated that public hospitals should not fall behind private hospitals. Public hospitals are often also measured on waiting time for scans or how high the patient flow is. Because of this many Western European public hospitals want to buy new scanners that do it fast. Often scans in public hospitals is also limited to the timeslot 08:00-16:00, also increasing the need of fast machines. Public hospitals also don’t usually exchange systems internally, because of either law, culture or they want to avoid budget cuts. This means they buy brand new high end machines, and sell all of the existing systems. Public hospitals also often have one budget for investments and one for operations, where money cannot be moved between them, which can incentives to f. ex. by a very expensive machine and fast machine to avoid hiring an extra nurse or doctor. This is in contrast to many private hospitals, where there is a bigger focus on profit, which means they need the right balance between a new and fast system, purchase price, depending on the patient flow capacity they need. This need is often meet by a mid range equipment. Private hospitals also often have longer opening times, and even 24/7 opening hours some places, increasing their patient flow capacity. Therefore private hospitals typically have less need for machines that can scan fast. Leasing companies are effected by the above as they service the public and private hospitals, but do not independently take the decisions.
Explain OEM sucking up the market and increasing prices, and then they maybe later dumb the market: New interview? ¨ Notes:
OEM buy back used systems with the purpose of refurbishment programs. Sometimes they switch the old ones out with a new one through a loyalty program, where they give away free upgrades: f. ex. software thats normally very expensive to buy, but are free for the OEM to give away. Then they check the old system, refurbish, then sell it away. Here they sometimes vacum the market, so they buy all the old systems.
Sometimes a OEM dumps many systems in the market, f. ex. 10 systems at a time. This can crash the price, and companies goes broke. Not only because supply is to high. If systems is published through many tradedesk and brokers, then because all of them try to hide the source, and publish it as there own system supply to the markets seems way higher. F. ex. one stock being sold, in the market view seems like 10 stocks being sold.
5.2	Auctions
As explained in the previous section not all trading happens on the auction, but this is a big majority. As explained in the method this projects only works with the auction part of the market. SMS trades on four different private OEM platforms. Each works in similar ways with some slight differences.
As stated in the method section an auction is defined as:
"an auction will be understood to include the process of procurement via competitive bidding (Krishna, 2009)."
Write from the latest interview. The below is a mix of notes and actual text.
Difference between when you bid having a customer or buying to stock?
Do you have a max reserve price? Sqeeshing the margin?
Are you affected by others buyers bids?
Har hospitalerne en reserve price? De vil ikke sælger under dette?
Er det en mechanism i stedet for en auction?
Unknown value(only estimates) at the time of auction for the buyer: (interdependent values, buy for resale). Such a specification is called one of interdependent values and is particularly suited for situations in which the object being sold is an asset that can possibly be resold after the auction.
The common auction forms discussed thus far have the virtue of simplicity— the rules of the auction are transparent— and this may be an important practical consideration. Another important factor may be the potential for collusion among bidders. As we will see later, auction formats differ in their susceptibility to such collusion.
A second important aspect of auction-like institutions is that they are anonymous . By this we mean that the identities of the bidders play no role in determining who wins the object and who pays how much. So if bidder 1 wins with a bid of b 1 and pays some amount p , then keeping all other bids fixed, if some other bidder— say, bidder 2— were to bid b 1 and bidder 1 were to bid b 2 , then bidder 2 would win and pay p also. Every bidder other than 1 and 2— say, bidder 3— is completely unaffected if bidders 1 and 2 exchange their bids in the manner just described. In later chapters we place auctions in a larger class of institutions, called mechanisms . Mechanisms differ from auctions in that they are not necessarily universal or anonymous.
All of the auction platforms have a set of rules that apply, when you ask to join the platform. If rules are broken to a high enough degree then you get banned from the platform. It can be very hard to join the platform, as the platforms wants to ensure that only serious and financially stable companies join as this makes the platform better. In addition to the fixed rules, the platform owners/managers can do things that are not described in the rules, which can change the mechanics of the platform source: ???
All the platforms are what is called a Anonymous sealed-bid first-price auction system in auction theory (Krishna, 2009). The way it works is that the platform sends out a trade request on mail or website for a product. This request contains some amount of information about the specifications of the product, images and the conditions for the sale and how you can bid. The information about the system can vary to a high degree, from only knowing a few details to having several images of the system and a report stating the full specifications and condition of the system. There is 1-3 ways to bid on the trade request. You can bid to buy the system, to remove the system for free and charge a price to remove it. In essence this means you can buy the system for a positive or negative amount, but incurring cost in terms of removal, handling, transport, etc??. Only the Phillips TID platform offers all these 3 bids, whereas the others only have the bid to buy the system at a price. Prices cannot be zero or negative legally, so if the system is valued to zero considering handling costs, then SMS often bid a symbolic amount like 1 EUR (Rothgarn, 2021).
When SMS have an idea of what price they want to bid for, they send it in response to the request. All requests have a deadline for bidding typically within one week. After this deadline the platform managers evaluate all bids and pick the best bid. As standard the highest bid is the best bid, but there is some exceptions to that will be discussed later.
What is the conditions for the sale? Is it the same for all platforms? - Sold as is, without warranty. Can renegotiate price afterwards? - What is the price inclusive and exclusive? If conditions are changed, then the auction is often cancelled and a new auction is started with the new information, otherwise the price and the deal is renegotiated.
All requests have a bid expire date, which until that date, the bid you send is binding. This date is typically after the platform knows if they won the contract with the end-user and latest around the availability date, which is when the product can be dismantled on-site (Rothgarn, 2021).
How binding? Legal moneywise? Some times SMS negotiate that this deadline is shorter, due to expectations that the market price might change.
Project specific conditions?
If you win the auction, then you are awarded the system, but only if the tradedesk also wins the contract at the customer, then you actually won the system and have to pay. When is payment? Upfront, but when?
The reason it is a auction market is to solve the problem of not knowing the true value of the product and not knowing what customer will pay the highest value. If the seller knew the true value, they could just list the product at that price.
The highest bid should reflect who will have the highest value of the system to a high degree. The challenge is that the buyer might not themselves know the true value, but maybe they have an idea of the value based on historical experience or maybe they have a potential buyer that has given a price. Depending on the level of information about the value, the value becomes interdependent which means that the bid price can be affected by what other others are willing to bid.
The correlation between bid and value, depends on market player, incentives and strategi??? Different companies have different marginal value of the product, which can be caused by different cost structures, potential customers purchase price, taxes, incentives, etc. Both the auction platform and the companies buying from them have the aim to maximize profits (Krishna, 2009).
5.3	Market operations
How does SMS and others operate. Explain other operations such as transport, storage, deconstrunction, packiging, etc.
From Jens Poulsen: As the broker business is a non-trust business everyone wants guarantees against each others. So whenever someone buys a system from us or we buy from them, everyone pays up front, often a percentage at signing and the rest x amount of days after, often 15 or 30 days, or at delivery. Some times the upfront part at signing can be a depositum that is lost if the other part backs out afterwards if the agreement terms are not broken. In SMS we often have a 20.000 EUR fee at signing. To not damage customer relations if they want to back out, we sometimes agree with them that we keep the fee and then they kan keep that for the next system they buy from us. In this way the customer is happy, they are drawn to buy from us again, we have free liquidity, we can sell the system to someone else.
Sometimes we have bought a system, but we have never payed as the seller has never send a factura. After 5 years the factura is not valid and we do not have to pay them. This has happened several times in Agito. In SMS others are also late to pay.
6	Predictions
The purpose of the whole report is to do predictions as an assistance for traders. What does predictions are will be described in this section.
Predictions: (what is wanted) Forecasting period. What to predict.
What to predict: What will help the most? Ask SMS. Can change over the project period. 1+ more predictions.
Predictions: Price -> sale (can be given beforehand, partly known or unknown) Price -> to win Price -> fair value Price -> to win with minimum x percent chance Price -> to earn money, based also on risk. Percent chance of winning at a price
6.1	The business value
Fast estimate, less time used, middleman between sales and purchase estimate,
6.2	Defining the predictions
The price is a: Average over time, price estimate and win chance.
6.3	Implementing the predictions
6.4	Explainability
What should the application do:
Predict 1 or more outcomes. Show it to user. Explain the outcome. Explain
Explainable AI: should it show how it made the prediction? Show feature importance. For the model in general but also for each single prediction. - https://cloud.google.com/ai-platformunified/docs/explainable-ai/overview We can get the explanation together with the prediction and show to the user.
Why need it to be an assistant: When SMS bids, they want the product, but they also know that if they win all products, they bid on they would not have enough money. So unless they know they can make fast money or arbitrage instantly, they need conservative bids, to increase profits on the projects they win, but also avoid to commit to much cash at once. - This should also be
It should be able to explain the impact of missing data, and then adjust based on worst, average, best case, estimated case (risk scenarios).
There will always be a judgement and some information that only the trader known, from experience, phone calls, that cannot currently be estimated from automl. There the bidding tool system must be an assistant.
Price to win auction. Fair price (risk and cost model, get data for selling price, transport cost, packing, storage, etc.) What price to bid if you want to earn money. How should the profit scenario be? Link to if we have a seller already, estimated or agreed selling price. Percent chance to win a auction based on a price. 
7	Data
This section will go in depth about what data is needed to do the predictions, explain the data and how it was collected.
The required data for doing the predictions is the same as what the traders require. This means that in a optimal model, all of the available data that the traders uses for decision making should be available to the models when doing predictions. In addition to this the model needs a certain amount of data to be able to generalize the patterns, whereas the trader does so based on past experience.
Therefore it makes sense to first know what data traders use to predict the prices. The data can be divided into the different subcategories which are: Model, condition, upgrades, operations cost, customer specific and market conditions. The below subsections will go into more details about each category.
Data: (what to use for prediction) Explain data -> (extraction of data, cleaning of data, selection of data) Special types of data to use. Do we have a big enough sample? Distribution Population differences When outcome is now known.
All data showed in this chapter is the data used for training.
7.1	Model data
The model data is everything that is fixed to a certain model when it is produced. This covers a wide range of different variables and data that is to big to cover in this section in full, but the most important and relevant will be covered here.
7.1.1	Modality
Modality is the most important feature to know, and is the product category type. Comparing this to cars, this would f. ex. be a station wagon, truck, sports car, etc. For image equipment modalities the categories are typically categorized by the method by how the image is generated (check???) such as ultrasound, radiation such as x-rays, and MRI (source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/imaging-modality). All of the categories are listed in below table.
Table of modalities.
The modality defines both the technical capabilities, the purpose and the customer segment of the product. The most common modalities for SMS are: MRI and CT. Explain differences. Will i be limited to those? Combine modalities? Other? Show overview of modalities.
7.1.2	Brand
The products can be produced by many different brands, also called OEM’s (Original Equipment Manufacturer’s). Each manufacturer is known for different things, such as price, quality, special software, usability, durability, etc. There is also a element of end-users in the hospitals getting used to a specific brand and therefore having a preference for this brand. Brands also have different popularity in different regions in the world, and this effect how easy and how costly it is to get service, repairs and spare parts for the product (source: Poulsen?). The main brand worldwide is: . Show overview of brands in data.
7.1.3	Model name
Each brand then produces different models for each modality. Each model haves a model name. There can be cases where a model name is used both for products in different modalities. Each model can then have different variants, f. ex. a low and a high performance edition. There is thousands of different model names and variants. Show unique number of models from data. A challenge with models names is that there is a difference in how different companies specify the model names, and it might not be the correct names that the OEM gave it. F. ex. Phillips have a CT scanner called "Ingenuity", it comes in different variants such as "Flex","Elite" or "5000". In addition to this there is also variants within the "Flex" so it can be a "Flex 16" or a "Flex 32" where the number specifies the number of slices, which is a important metric for performance. This showcases the high complexity and hierarchical structure of the different products.
Make hiearchichal tree of model names.
Modality -> Brand -> Model -> variant -> variant version.
This is the customer view. Because they look for a specific modality and a model type.
7.1.4	Year of manufacture
YOM (Year of manufacture) is the year that the product was produced. This therefore shows how old the product is, which correlates with usage of the product and also the current condition of the product. In addition to this the year it was produced is also important in terms of which technical capabilities it has and how upgradable it is in terms of f. ex. software. This might not be a linear correlation, but there might be a important cutoff year, where products older than this are not very upgradable (source: Poulsen).
7.2	Description of data
7.3	Data collection
8	Automated machine learning
Automated machine learning is a quite new area of study within the academic literature as was first made in ?? source: . This section will go in depth about the developments within the area, what it does, how it performs and how it can be used. The below sections assumes that you have a fundamental understanding of ML and AI. If a recap of basic fundamentals is needed the read section 2 in following paper that gives a good introduction (aitworldwide, n.d.).
Automl: (how to predict it, and what should be done) Explain automl -> (history, method, implementations, challenges) How to select automl? -> who is selected? comparison? 1-more automl? Evaluate performance What can automl not do, that we need to do.
8.1	Workflow
This first subsection will go through of how the workflow is automated using automl. The aim of automl is as stated in the introduction to reduce the development time and cost of ML and AI models and applications. There is a trade off between automation and model performance, and because of this various automl platforms gives different amount of control on the workflow. As shown in figure 3, automl can automate the whole pipeline of creating a ML model, from data preparation, feature engineering, model generation and model evaluation. This section builds primarily on a survey of the state of the art conducted by He et al. (2019).
Fig. 3: Automl workflow
 
Source: (He et al., 2019).
Automated everything off the above will allow a domain specialist with little knowledge of math, statistics and ml to create models with decent performance. The task that is left for the domain specialist is to select and provide the data in correct formats. As domain specialist know what is important for their area, this makes good sense. A specialized data scientist with knowledge of ML can still help with increasing the performance in guiding in how to select data, amount of data needed, cleaning the data and prepare it in the right formats. Experienced data scientist can also use it as a exploratory data analysis, gaining information about about variable importance, a suggested model type, giving a good start for a new ml project.
As shown in the figure model generation can be divided into search space and optimization methods. The search space is the design principles of how a optimal model is found. There is 2 categories of models, the traditional ML models f. ex. SVM (Support Vector Machines) and KNN (k-nearest neighbors), and the neural architectures. The optimization methods can be divided into HPO (hyperparameter optimization) and AO (architecture optimization) where the former indicates the trainingrelated parameters (e.g., the learning rate and batch size), and the latter indicates the model-related parameters (e.g., the number of layer for neural architectures and the number of neighbors for KNN) .
NAS consists of three important components: the search space of neural architectures, AO methods, and model estimation methods. AO methods may also refer to search strategy [10] or search policy [11]. Zoph et al. [12] were one of the first to propose NAS, where a recurrent network is trained by reinforcement learning to automatically search for the best-performing architecture.Since [12] successfully discovered a neural network achieving comparable results to human-designed models, there has been an explosion of research interest in AutoML, with most focusing on NAS. NAS aims to search for a robust and well performing neural architecture by selecting and combining different basic operations from a predefined search space.By reviewing NAS methods, we classify the commonly used search space into entire-structured [12, 13, 14], cell-based[13, 15, 16, 17, 18], hierarchical [19] and morphism-based[20, 21, 22] search space. The commonly used AO methods contain reinforcement learning (RL) [12, 15, 23, 16, 13],evolutionbased algorithm (EA) [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30],and gradient descent (GD) [17, 31, 32], Surrogate Model Based Optimization (SMBO) [33, 34, 35,36, 37, 38, 39],and hybrid AO methods [40, 41, 42, 43, 44].
Describe the ML workflow and what parts automl tries to automate. What parts do we still control. What parts brings value? What parts can bring value to by controlling ourselves.
8.2	Understanding automl
History of automl. Theory. NAS.
8.3	Performance of automl
This section will discuss the performance of automl algorithms compared with models created manually by humans. It’s important to note that the industry in general accepts that data and feature engineering determines the upper bound of what is possible to solve with ML, and that a good model can only approximate this limit (He et al., 2019). The challenge even for experts are that there is so many possibilities for creating models, and it can become a very tedious process of trial and error until a good model is achieved for a particular dataset. Unless best practice is always followed in terms of validation and test data sets, over fitting bias can also be introduced into the model. For very complicated data and models, trial and error approach might lead experts to a sub optimal model, as not all models, and combinations are tried (Hutter et al., 2019).
Hutter et al. (2019) states that "AutoML approaches are already mature enough to rival and sometimes even outperform human machine learning experts.". An example of automl performance was showcased in the 2020 M5 forecasting competition. The M competitions has a history of 40 years with 5 comptetitions in total. That years competition was a time series forecasting problem with a real-life dataset for Walmart product sales, with 3000 unique products, 10 Walmart locations and 3 different states. Over 5500+ teams competed in the tournament. To the knowledge of this report, only two automl solutions competed in the competition and google cloud automl came in top 2,5% and dotData came in top 3,0% and later 1,8% with a second try with a ensemble model. Both Google AutoML and dotData used no or very little human intervention, and only moderate compute power. Google Automl also tried to benchmark against kaggle competitions, that are online forecasting competitions and it outperformed 92% of hand crafted models, with little resource use (Liang and Lu, 2020) (Garla, 2020). Important to note is that automl performance depends highly on the algorithms used, what problem it tries to solve and if compute power is limited or not. In both cases automl outperforms most other manual models, but it was not the best model. This confirms the thinking of Hutter et al. (2019), that automl approximate the limit of performance that can be achieved, by modelling alone. Even though it might be possible to increase performance slightly by using a manual model, human time is would often be spend better on finding, collecting and cleaning data to increase performance.
There is a project trying to benchmark the open source free automl algorithms against each other and other ml benchmark models. They use 39 classification data sets, 4 automl systems and 3 benchmark methods consisting of a constant predictor (predicting the mean), a random forest model and a tuned random forest model. In general 3 of the automl algorithms consistently predict at the top, either above or at the same level of performance as the random forest models (openml, 2021). This underlines the great performance of most automl systems, but of course these are only 4 of many automl models.
8.4	Applying automl
There exist many different automl algorithms, some created by academics, some are by open source practitioners and others are created by companies as paid services. Each have there own pros and cons in terms of performance, problem specialization, to what degree it automates each part of the workflow, configuration, compute power used, ease of use and pricing. In general the the paid automl services are more user friendly, and often integrated into a nice data platform, making it easier to use in practice in a company. The open source automl systems typically required a specialist with some knowledge of ml and programming experience. When considering what a specialist is paid in the hourly salaries, then at least several of the paid services are often cheaper to use compared to open source. The issue with some of the paid services is that they hide the actual steps the algorithm performs, which is not always acceptable by the business or end-user of the predictions. On the other hand some paid services are very good at explaining what the algorithm does, and even so a non expert can understand it.
One platform that is easy to use, explain the process, options for configurations, have high performance, cheap to use, offers different automl algorithm within the same platform and have explain-ability of features importance for predictions is google cloud. Google cloud offers their own AutoML algorithm, which was the one that came in top 2,5% in the M5 competition. This platforms is also the one that SMS stores all their data in, and have their apps located in so this is a natural choice for SMS to implement at least for a start. The following section will explain in-depth how it works.
8.5	Google Cloud automl
When using Google Cloud automl it is possible to do both classification and regression with tabular data. The way it works is by specifying a target column to predict, select any time columns, a data split for training, validation and testing, select a metric to optimize the model for, select a maximum training time/budget and whether the model is allowed to stop early if results are not improving significantly. During training it is possible to see how the model performance improves over time. After training is complete it is possible to see a evaluation of the model on several different metrics, visualizations and a overview of global feature importance. The final model can then be deployed and used for predictions. This section will now explain in depth each step and how the model training works, with the purpose of understanding of how the results are derived (Google, n.d.b).
First a target column must be selected. For a regression this must be a number and for classification it can numbers or text representing different classes. If one or more of the input variables represents time, and that effects how the data is distributed, it is possible to specify it is a time column. This affects the data split, so the earliest rows are used for training, the next for validation and the last for testing. The data split is as standard divided into a training set (80%), validation set (10%) and a test set (10%). It is possible to customize this split or select which set each single row should be in
The next thing to choose is the metric the model should be optimized for. For regression it is possible to select RMSE (Root Mean Square Error), MAE (mean absolute error), RMSLE (Root Mean Squared Logarithmic Error). For classification it is possible to select ROC AUC (receiver operating characteristic Area Under the Curve), Log loss, PR AUC (Precision Recall Area Under the Curve, Precision at recall and Recall at Precision (Google, n.d.b).
Then it is possible to select a training time/budget. The minimum is what is called 1 node hour, but it is possible to select a very high budget. 1 node hour cost around 100 kr. pr. hour. For dataset with small data amount such as this project 1 hour is enough to train the model to optimal performance. It is possible to select if the model should be able to stop early of performance is not increases significantly anymore.
The first thing that the automl algorithm does is to analyze the data on a number of metrics, which it then uses to select what transformation should be applied to the feature of the dataset. There is 4 relevant transformation that will be described here: Categorical, Text, Numeric and timestamp. First they will be explained and then a discussion about when it makes sense to use which. The listing of transformations builds directly on top of the following source: (Google, n.d.a). For all transformations types it applies a series of transformations and it uses any that provide prediction power. This means that f. ex. 3 input features can become 11 input features, because each has several transformations it uses.
The numeric transformation causes a feature to be used as a ordinal or quantitative number, and it applies the following transformations:
•	Z score of the value
•	A bucket index of the value based on quantiles. Bucket size is 100.
•	log(value+1) when the value is greater than or equal to 0. Otherwise, this transformation is not applied and the value is considered a missing value.
•	Z score of log(value+1) when the value is greater than or equal to 0. Otherwise, this transformation is not applied and the value is considered a missing value.
•	A boolean value that indicates whether the value is null.
•	Extreme/outlier values are not given any special treatment.
The categorical transformation makes a feature to be used as values in a category. Categorical values are case-sensitive, so spelling mistakes create new categories. It applies the following transformations:
•	The categorical string as is–no change to case, punctuation, spelling, tense, and so on.
•	Convert the category name to a dictionary lookup index and generate an embedding for each index.
•	Categories that appear less than 5 times in the training dataset are treated as the "unknown" category. The "unknown" category gets its own special lookup index and resulting embedding.
The text transformation causes a feature to be used as a free-form text, and it applies the following transformations:
•	The text as is–no change to case, punctuation, spelling, tense, and so on.
•	Tokenize text to words and generate 1-grams and 2-grams from words. Convert each ngram to a dictionary lookup index and generate an embedding for each index. Combine the embedding of all elements into a single embedding using the mean.
•	Missing values get their own lookup index and resulting embedding.
•	Stop-words receive no special treatment and are not removed.
The timestamp transformation makes a feature to be used as a point in time, and it applies the following transformations:
•	Apply the transformations for Numerical columns.
•	Determine the year, month, day,and weekday. Treat each value from the timestamp as a Categorical column.
The above transformations google automl applies is one of the main reasons it can reach so high performance, in combination with the search space and optimization methods. Metrics that is very relevant for what transformation gives high performance is especially how many distinct values there is (for categorical and text). It will be shown later that this is very defining for how features such as the model name of a product performs.
8.6	Benchmark models
To validate the performance of the automl algorithms they will be compared with a series of traditional benchmark models, which is described in this section.
Describe benchmark models such as: Constant predictor (mean/median value), random forest, KNN, linear regression/classification, other linear models? 
9	Results
Results: What is the performance of predictions. (how to measure and compare, what to compare?) How can the forecasting be used in practice: - interviews with traders showcase the use. - how are traders influenced by the application. - do they use the application raw result or adjust based on uncertainty, strategy and other variables? - could these other factors at some point be incorperated? Can we replace the traders (as a bidder). how does performance compare to traders predictions?
9.1	A
9.2	B
9.3	C 
10	Conclusion 
11	Terms list
Alphabetically, grouped by theme? Sort in excel later.
AI: Artificial intelligence ML: Machine learning Automl: Automated machine learning SVM:
Support Vector Machines KNN: k-nearest neighbors HPO (hyperparameter optimization) AO (architectureoptimization)
OEM: Original Equipment Manufacturer YOM: Year of manufacture mAs: Milliampere seconds
CAGR: Compound annual growth rate
RSO: Independent service organisation KPI: Key Performance Indicators
RMSE: Root Mean Square Error MAE: mean absolute error RMSLE: Root Mean Squared Logarithmic Error ROC AUC: receiver operating characteristic Area Under the Curve PR AUC:
Precision Recall Area Under the Curve 
